# Value-Added
# Produce Value-Added Progress Reports for 142 Secondary Schools in Trinidad and Tobago

# Introduction

In Trinidad and Tobago, secondary school performance is generally assessed on the basis of Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate (CSEC) passes, more specifically the percentage of students attaining five or more CSEC Subjects inclusive of Mathematics and English A ie. (a full certificate). This is because attaining a full certificate, is vital to students' post-secondary opportunities. This gives rise to the concept of "underperforming" and "high performing" schools based on pass rates of secondary schools. However, judging the concept of school performance solely on the acheivement level of students', at a single point of time is an inadequate measure by itself. Students enter the secondary education system at different levels of readiness. As such at the end of a five year period, some students are relatively less prepared then others. Those less prepared must go an extra mile in other to "catch up" to higher acheiving counterparts. Traditional "underperforming" schools generally have an intake of students who are less prepared, therefore comparing their efforts to traditionally "high performing" schools whose general intake of students are relatively more prepared is an unfair measure. It is also important to note that students' performance is not entirely dependent on educational performance but a variety of factors such as quality teaching and instruction, student readiness and prior schooling, socioeconomic status, home resources, parental involvement, attendance, student motivation and school climate. Thus Value-Added is a growth/progress measure introduced to accounts for intake differences. With the Value-Added measure, it can be determined if students' left a school in a better position then when they started. Subsequently, traditionally "low performing" schools may not be producing students that meet a national standard of achievement but, students may leave schools much better off than they started, having made large gains in their academic ability.

# Value Added Model

Value added is a kind of growth model that measures the contribution of schooling to student performance on standardized assessments by using statistical techniques to separate the impact of schooling from other factors that may influence growth. Value added analysis compares the eventual educational outcome of students to their prior academic achievement to determine how much growth students have made during their period of schooling. Examples of the use of value added can be found in the following educational jurisdictions: United States - Tennessee Value-Added Assessment System, UK - Progress 8, Cayman Islands and Chile. This measure determine how effectively the impact of the school was on student’s learning. The value added for the secondary school is calculated by looking at students attainment in CSEC given their prior ability which we proxy with the total weighted Secondary Entrance Assessment (SEA) score. This information is then put into a multilevel regression equation. In layman's terms, based on a student's (Student A) total weighted SEA Score, the model looks at all students with a similar total weighted SEA Score and calculates a national average CSEC ‘score’ for students with that particular SEA score. This CSEC ‘score’ is based on students grades at CSEC and  is known as the predicted score of any student with this baseline ability. An actual CSEC 'score' based on student A's CSEC grades is then calculated. The difference between the two 'scores' gives a student's value added. A secondary school's value added is then calculated from individual student value added  and is reported with confidence intervals. The main use of the 95% confidence intervals is to judge whether each school is ‘significantly more effective’, ‘significantly less effective’, or ‘not significantly different’ from the national average.

# Codes

First value-added data is produced using a Python code. This code requires the input of an SEA database (5 years prior) and a current CSEC database Eg. CSEC 2022 and SEA 2017 would be used. This is beacuse the SEA database from five years prior contain the SEA scores of the students that write CSEC in the current year (students are in secondary school for 5 years) 


